.. role:: math(raw)   :format: html latex..======
Design======For various reasons, many X-ray techniques developed at synchrotronfacilities around the world are unable to directly compare results dueto their inability to exchange data and software tools. The aim of DataExchange is to define a simple file format offering few basic rules andallowing each community to extend and add technique specific components.The goal is to provide extensibility in defining data, meta data andprovenance information in a simple way that can be easily adopted byvarious X-ray techniques.The Data Exchange format is implemented using Hierarchical Data Format 5:cite:`HDF:01`, which offers platform-independent binary data storage withoptional compression, hierarchical data ordering, and self-describingtags so that one can examine a HDF5 file’s contents with no knowledge ofhow the file writing program was coded.The aim and the scope of Data Exchange is very similar to the CoherentX-ray Imaging Data Bank file format (CXI) :cite:`CXI:01`, so whenever possible we willuse the same conventions, name tags, and reference system. This documentis using a similar diagram definition set by the CXI file format :cite:`CXI:02` 
with a few minor modifications for Data Exchange definitions.The core principle of Data Exchange is that it must be simple enoughthat it is not necessary to use a support library beyond core HDF5. Thesimplicity of Data Exchange makes it easy for anyone to either look atan example file using h5dump or HDFView, or to look at example code inlanguage X, and then create their own read and write routines inlanguage Y.The simplest Data Exchange file provides information sufficient to sharea multidimensional data array. In this simplest form, Data Exchange**implements** only one **exchange** group. The **exchange** definition isdesigned to allow for simple exchange of images, spectra, and otherforms of beamline detector data with a minimum of fields. Thisdefinition is essentially a technique-agnostic format for exchangingdata with others. Data Exchange is also designed to be extended toinclude technique-specific data and metadata. This is achieved byproviding optional, but clearly defined, metadata components to the basedefinition.HDF5====The HDF5 format is the basis of the Data Exchange format. Data Exchange,like CXI :cite:`CXI:01`, is not a completely new file format, but simply a set of rulesdesigned to create HDF5 files with a common structure to allow a uniformand consistent interpretation of such files.HDF5 was chosen as the basis because it is a widely used highperformance scientific data format which many programs can already, atleast partially, read and write. It also brings with it the almostautomatic fulfillment of the Data Exchange requirements, i.e.simplicity, flexibility and extensibility. HDF5 version 1.8 or higher isrequired as previous versions don’t support all features required byData Exchange.Data types----------Data Exchange uses the same CXI convention for data types as defined at:cite:`CXI:01` using HDF5 native datatypes. The data shouldbe saved in the same format as it was created/acquired. For example CCDimages acquired as 16 bit integers should be saved using theH5T_NATIVE_SHORT HDF5 type. In this way all cross platform big-littleendian issues reading and writing files are eliminated.Root Level Structure====================While HDF5 gives great flexibility in data storage, straightforward filereadability and exchange requires adhering to an agreed-upon naming andorganizational convention. To achieve this goal, Data Exchange adopts alayered approach by defining a set of **mandatory** and optional fields.The general structure of a Data Exchange file is shown intable [tab:genrules]. The most basic file must have an **implements**string, and an **exchange** group at the root level/group of the HDF5file. Optional *measurement* and *provenance* groups are also defined.Beyond this, additional groups may be added to meet individual needs,with guidelines suggesting the best structure.
+---------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------+|     Member    |       Type     |            Example                      |
+===============+================+=========================================+|**implements** | string dataset | **exchange**:*measurement*:*provenance* |+---------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------+| **exchange**  |     group      |                                         |
+---------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------+| *measurement* |     group      |                                         |+---------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------+| *provenance*  |     group      |                                         |+---------------+----------------+-----------------------------------------+**implements**    |     | Mandatory scalar string dataset in the root of the HDF5 file whose      value is a colon separated list that shows which components are      present in the file. All components listed in the **implements**      string are to be groups placed in the HDF5 file at the root      level/group. In a minimal Data Exchange file, the only **mandatory**      item in this list is **exchange**. A more general Data Exchange file      also contain *measurement* and possibly *provenance*, in which case 
      the **implements** string would be: **exchange**:*measurement*:*provenance*.**exchange**    |     | Mandatory group containing one or more arrays that represent the      most basic version of the data, such as raw or normalized optical      density maps or a elemental signal map. **Exchange_N** is      used when more than one core dataset or derived datasets are saved      in the file. The **exchange** implementation for specific techniques      are defined in separate sections in the Reference Guide.*measurement*    |     | Optional group containing the *measurement* made on the sample;      *measurement* contains information about the sample and the      instrument; *measurement_N* is used when more than one      *measurement* is stored in the same file.*provenance*    |     | Optional group containing information about the status of each      processing step.In a Data Exchange file, each dataset has a unit defined using the unitsattribute. units is not **mandatory** - if omitted, the default unit asdefined in Appendix [appendix:units] is used.The detailed rules about how to store datasets within the exchange groupare best shown through examples in the next section. Detailed referenceinformation can be found in the section.
